Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricard Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Gerald Mosley. He is a former
California supervising deputy attorney general and he has been
researching writing and speaking on the topics of law
and sex work. And today we are focusing on
his book, sex workers and their clients in their
own words. So Dr Mosley, welcome to the show.
It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here.
So let me first ask you before we get
into the actual content of your book, what made
you interested in studying such a controversial and even
stigmatized topic as the experiences of sex clients and
their of sex workers? Sorry. And their clients, why
do you think it's important to talk about this
subject? Uh uh INCLUDING their own perspectives?
Well, I, I came to this work and from
a purely legal perspective, I was a lawyer all
my professional life. Uh BUT I never worked in
this area, but as a, as a legal intellectual
matter, uh it was always of interest to me
how laws about sex work can be justified. Uh
AGAINST American laws and constitutional provisions about privacy and
due process. And so I think it's worth mentioning
that, that I am an example of the fact
that you, you don't have to be self interested
as a sex worker yourself in order to find
this interesting and then very concerning, uh you know,
that can happen to anyone who looks at the
matter studies, the matter and who's interested in constitutional
principles and law. And that's what happened to me.
I sort of got into it slowly and began
to read about it and my concerns grew and
grew. And, uh, when I retired from the Attorney
General's office, I then dedicated myself to researching, uh,
researching this issue and, uh, and interviewing, uh, sex
workers, uh, and clients trying to sort of break
through the stereotypes and to find out what was
really there. Uh, THOSE people, the people that I
talked to are people who needed to be talked
to because people don't talk to them. Mhm. Uh,
YEAH. A and we will get in a second
into the ideas that the population that people in
general have about sex workers. But let me just
ask you in the context of your book, what
counts as a sex worker? And do you focus
on specific kinds of sex workers or are you
giving voice to sex workers in general?
Well, uh, setting aside my book for one sec,
OK. Phrase sex work is a very loosely defined
phrase and it can cover any kind of sexual
service, whether it is um, only fans work phone
sex, uh uh pornography, uh stripping and then what
we call prostitution, which is illegal in my country.
And that's the reason why in my own mind,
there's this sharp distinction between illegal physical sexual contact
for money and all kinds of other sex work.
But I wanted to start off by saying the
phrase sex work itself is very expansive. It's very
expensive now that actually poses a bit of a
problem for someone like me who's a lawyer. Because
what I'm interested in, it's what's legal and what's
illegal, that's not the same distinction as between sex
work and non sex work. So, in my book
and I put it in a footnote somewhere and
whenever I write, I have to make this clear,
I will use sex work here to mean the
kinds of sexual services that are illegal in the
United States and that is physical sexual contact for
money. So that's how I use the phrase. Uh
AND when you and I are talking, I will
probably use the phrase uh uh without thinking to
refer to illegal sexual services. But I just wanted
to make clear that in general out there, the
phrase is much more expansive than that. Mhm.
And how does the general population tend to think
about sex workers? What are some of the most
common ideas people have about them?
Well, it it, it is evolving, it is evolving
now, there is what you might call the, the
old fashioned view, but it's still, uh, there's still
a lot of it out there. So it's not
gone. And it's the, uh, it's the stereotype of
the sex worker that is the prostitute, uh, as,
as being just a reprehensible individual on all kinds
of different levels. And they are unclean and unsafe,
um, uh, just basically disreputable human beings, you just,
you take the word icky and then you give
it, you give it all kinds of respectable verbiage,
but that's what it ends up being is just
they're so icky and so a great deal of
stigma is always surrounding sex work. Now I say
it's evolving because, because nowadays in, in the United
States and I'm, I, I think I can safely
say in most of Europe, at least most of
Western Europe, there is an evolving attitude of, of
seeing the sex worker as a victim rather than
as just a low life that you wanna get
away from. And seeing uh the, the um seeing
the sex worker as a victim entails a lot
of social, political and legal implications. Uh uh There
is, there is a great deal of, well, I'll
just say attitudes rather than carefully articulated beliefs, attitudes
that essentially sex work is this very, very bad
thing out there whereby men hurt women. And that
is, of course, very, very simplified and people will
have all kinds of, uh, different ways of approaching
that. But there is, there is that rudimentary sentiment
out there that is, um, sex workers are themselves
harmed and clients are do the harming. And it's,
it's very simplistic and it is in, in my
opinion, just as wrong headed as the old fashioned
view. But, but we live at a time where
both of those stereotypes are mingling together in the
public. Mhm.
So, let me ask you now and this now
is about you directly about your book. Uh You
contrast the voices of sex workers and their clients
with the claims made by prohibitionists and prohibitionists here,
I guess, can include both, as you mentioned, the
old school kind of way of thinking. I mean,
the more conservative prohibitionists, but also the more f
uh the feminists, the prohibitionist feminists, the more progressive
ones that, that also have arguments against uh sex
work. So, uh but how would you frame the
debate here? What are, what are people debating exactly?
They're not debating one thing? OK. Uh um On
the one hand, you have very practical debates about
harms and many of us try to focus the
debate on practical harms, but that is one debate
out there. Um uh YOU know, uh uh uh
is uh is sex work conducive to violence is
sex work conducive to health problems. Uh Does health
work? Is it conducive to labor abuse? Those very,
those very practical and empirical Yes. Uh There is
also the debate and, and these are not separated
cleanly. You know, you, if you debate this, you,
you have to expect to find both of them
going on. At the same time, there are abstract,
philosophical or religious beliefs and feelings that are essentially
independent of those empirical issues about harms. But the,
and I will just call them philosophical, they're actually
sometimes very, very explicitly religious, sometimes they're more generally
moral. Um But I will just call them philosophical
or the abstract approaches. And, and, and those approaches
just see sex work as demeaning or degrading uh
without attaching an empirical meaning to those, to those
words. They are just uh and it's a very
intense feelings but based on an abstract approach to
sex work, it is, it is evil and it
diminishes the person. Uh And so you have those
two strains and if you're arguing like I do
and many people do for decriminalization, you always have
to be prepared to deal with both of them
because they're both out there.
Uh And so uh let me just ask you
about what I mentioned earlier that you in your
book decided to put side by side the arguments
put forth by prohibitionists and the qu and quotations
from sex workers and their clients about their own
lives and experiences. I mean, why did you think
that it was important to structure the book in
that way?
Well, the, the, the one simple reason is because
for many people who are, who are conventionally raised,
like I was conservative, conventionally, it's just downright surprising.
You just don't expect so many sex workers to
say these sorts of things and people need to
know it. Now, that's the simple, straightforward answer to
your question. Yeah. As a matter of fact, my
first, my first thought about doing this book was
to just have two columns and the quotations and
not do anything else, not tell the reader anything,
not even to introduce it, just say, look at
this, you know, look at this and be surprised
and you take it for what it is and
you know, you do with it what you want.
Uh But of course, in the, in the process
of figuring out how to actually structure the bulk
and get it published, you know, I add it
on uh uh the other material. Uh But, but
one reason, uh uh aside from the simple reason,
one reason is like, I, I wanna structure it
that way is it is very difficult to know
how to counter what I would call one of
the abstract arguments. If someone says that is degrading
and demeaning or that is that, you know, um
diminishes your personhood. One of my favorite phrases, how
do you rebut that? I mean, one thing you
can do is to try to, is to try
to play the philosophical game. And in this context,
I think it is a game and, and just
talk about, well, what is personhood and, and, and
what is, what is diminishing and what is there.
And I don't know how far that gets you.
And so I tried to do something else. I
tried to juxtapose the, the abstract, but really rather
vicious opposition to sex work with sex workers who
don't respond philosophically. They just talk about the concrete
aspects of their life and that's what they're doing.
And to juxtapose this very, very concrete practical description
of their lives against very very abstract condemnations of
what they do. And then inviting the reader reader
to say now, to what extent are these abstract
arguments relevant to the practical reality of this sex
worker? And once you begin to try to connect
the two, then you begin to ask her. So
what do these abstract phrases actually mean? Do they
really mean anything or they just out there as
linguistic tools to trigger an emotional response is that
the only function that they have? And so I'm
trying to get at that when I juxtapose them
with practical down to earth descriptions of how sex
workers work. For example, there's a, you know, the
that a lot of the prohibitions talk about how,
how cool and dominating clients are. And there's you
like to use the word power, imbalance and dominating
and then cruel and then you juxtapose that with.
And I was surprised to hear this too. They're
amusing but then they're very, very touching and important
and, and, and one sex worker says, you know,
I got clients who try to, who try to
give me an orgasm and of course, I can't
come all the time. But, but they try so
hard, they deserve a pat on the back. I
mean, you know, and yeah, and, and you know,
another sex worker says, you know, I gotta spend
so much time just convincing my clients that they're
not bad people. It's OK. It's OK. Well, and,
and you know, I those kinds of statements are
surprises to people who were raised in the world
that I was. People who are raised in that
network, need to hear those voices and they especially
need to hear those voices when they are, when
they are, when they are asked to listen to
these philosophical debates.
So just to make this point clear, what, what
were the main goals that you had in your
mind? Uh What, what goals did you have in
mind when writing this book? Because uh there's, I
guess at least one point that we have to
address here. That is the fact that uh you
interviewed sex workers and some clients, you put their,
uh their, their experiences, their, their statements in the
book. But it's a limited number of sex workers
and a limited number of clients. So someone could
put forth the criticism that we can't generalize from
that number and, and make broader claims about sex
workers in general, for example. But uh were you
simply trying to show people that there are some
sex uh sex workers and some clients out there
that do not experience sex work? The ways that
prohibitionists tend to claim?
Uh Yeah, it, it, for example, you, you, you
take, you take the sex worker who says, uh
she, she has to spend a lot of time
making her clients feel good. Uh And, and you
know, uh they're all most pathetic in the way
they try to please her. No one suggests that
all sex workers like and I certainly don't suggest
what I want to do is refute, universalizing philosophical
pictures of sex work. And that's different than taking
sex workers and generalizing and say, gee see, I've
now discovered what sex workers like. It's always like
this. I don't try to do that. And of
course, you know, but it is, it is I
believe effective in confronting universalizing statements about what is
inherent in sex work. If you believe that, that,
that dangerous power hungry, dominating clients are inherent in
sex work, then I want to show you all
the people that you have to disbelieve in order
to get to that conclusion. Uh And there are
a lot of them and they have different things
to say but, but the, but, but you cannot
take from what they say and take seriously a
universalizing or essentialist view of what sex work inherently
is, right. Uh You know, people, what, what a
lot of people who think that sex work should
be decriminalized. They do, they, they, they don't want
to tell you what sex work is like. It's
some philosophical discovery. Now, there are exceptions. But he
here, I'm generalizing, that's not the point. Uh The
point is, is you cannot rationally come up with
generalizations that justify the typical stereotypes and that justify
the kinds of laws that we have. And you
can't do that because the number of people you
have to disbelieve just keeps growing. And you know,
you can start off by saying uh uh that,
that they have some illusion or delusion or mental
problem, but you know, they keep coming and that
retort gets weaker and weaker all the time. So
all that process of arguing can be done without
having a systematically rigorous sampling of sex works to
generalize into a uh an overall statement about sex
work with one reason why that's extremely difficult to
do is because it's illegal and you're asking people
to come forward to break the law and then
have some sort of statistical mechanism to make sure
you're getting a representative sample that would be extremely
difficult to do. But there's a lot that can
be done short of that.
And do, do you think that people might also
be missing something if they tend to think to
think that most or even all sex workers are
female and most or all clients are male. I
mean, because there are also male sex workers and
female clients. Do you think that people, if people
have in their minds, this picture of sex workers
always being female and clients always being male, that
they would be missing something about this subject.
Um No, I don't think there's any question that
that's the stereotype and that's what's in people's minds
when they talk about the law and when they
talk about the, their philosophical perspective, they imagine a
woman selling and a man buying. Uh And it
is, it, it is, as you say, it's not
true that that's always the case, but it is
important to understand, but that's not always the case
because many of the, many of the say, essentialist
arguments and philosophical arguments a so that it's a
woman who is selling and a buyer who is,
who is buying and that women are now being
subjected to a, you know, patriarchal dominance. And that
sex work is just another example of our inscription
of patriarchal dominance. All that kind of talk assumes
that you're talking about a woman who is providing
sex in a man who is, who is spying
it. Uh And one of the things that I
tried, well, I, I didn't try for like I
had one conversation with a group of folks and,
and there were a lot of LGBT Q uh
representatives there. And I, you know, I brought up
the suggestion which I still believe in, but it,
it, I couldn't get that ball rolling. So, you
know, why, why doesn't the gay community bring a
lawsuit? And, and, and, and in, in most jurisdictions
in the United States, you can bring an as-applied
lawsuit. You can say here is this constitutional principle
or here is this legal principle. And we're not
gonna argue that the law is always wrong. We're
gonna argue that as applied to us, it's unconstitutional.
And I say, look, look, you guys, there, there
are, there are a lot of straight and gay
men who sell sex. Why don't you bring a
lawsuit as applied and say the law against prostitution
is unconstitutional as applied to me and then force
the other side to come up with all the
arguments about why sex work is supposed to harm
you. I would, I would be delighted to see
a lawsuit like that. Uh But there are, well,
there's always economic reasons and there may be political
reasons when that hasn't been done. It's hard to
do because you have to get a representative client.
And these are, this is illegal behavior and it's
stigmatized behavior. But I, I mentioned that just because
I want to emphasize the fact that so much
of the argument that goes on rests on the
view that sex work is all about men hurting
women, right? So, mhm. So
let's now go through the main claims made by
prohibitionists and what some of the sex workers, the
ones you interview have to reply to them or
to say about them in their own words. So
first uh they, the prohibitionists tend to make claims
about their subjective lives and they use terms like
self contempt, loss of dignity, degradation, dehumanization. What is
the main claim made here by the prohibitionists? And
then we can get into what the sex workers
themselves say.
Well, uh you have to be careful about trying
to, to pin down the thing that prohibitionists say,
prohibitionists will say anything that they can get away
with saying uh and, and um the words like
degrading and demeaning and disrespectful. They do not have
a clear enough defined meaning to restrict prohibitionists. They
will throw out those words whenever it's convenient. So
it, so I don't want to say, gee this
is their, their one thing that they have to
say what they want to emphasize is that, that,
well, that it's, that's very bad for the provider
and they're usually talking about a woman provider because
it diminishes that person. And then you can go
into all of the synonyms that you want to
use, degrading and exploiting and, and all those kind.
Uh And, and, you know, we could talk about
words for a long time, even the word exploitation
uh in, in many contexts that has a clear
enough meaning, but not when you're talking about sex
work. The, the, the whole, the whole meaning of
exploitation collapse. When you're talking with prohibitionist, they will
simply want to say that sex work is exploited
by its own nature inherently. And you say so
what do you mean by that? I mean, I
mean, you certainly don't mean that the guy needs
to pay more. That's not what you mean. And
isn't it ironic that if he doesn't pay her
anything that's not exploitation, but as soon as he
actually pays her, then it's exploited. So you see
the word in, in the context of sex work
just collapses. Uh My, my favorite example is there's
underage girl, I guess in high school and she
was taking, you know, the sex pictures of herself,
nudes of herself and, and sending them out some
on social media coming and she was arrested. Now,
II I don't know that she was ever convicted.
I'm not sure what actually happened, but she was
charged with exploitation, sexual exploitation because she was exploiting
herself. Now that's how bizarre the notion of exploitation
gets. But I digress a little bit in talking
about exploitation. What, what let's call them the abstract
prohibitionist. What they want to do is simply to
instill and to reinforce the stereotype that there's something
very, very icky about prostitution and they don't want
to use the word icky. So they sound philosophical
by using all of these other terms. I, I
like to think of it as it, it, it's
a way of, it's a way of spitting and
sounding philosophical at the same time. Uh So that's
what they're trying to do. They're just trying to
say that, that we should have an emotionally averse
feeling to sex. Uh Now, now that's the abstract
people, there are other people who make empirical claims,
but if we're just talking about the abstract folks,
it's very, very difficult to pin them down. And
that's the same reason why their arguments ultimately collapse
on themselves. That's just what they're trying to do.
Right? A and we will also probably get into
some of the empirical claims made by them later
in our conversation. But when it comes to the
topic of satisfaction and well being of subjective life
in general, what do I, I mean, could you
give us examples of what some of the sex
workers you interviewed have to say on that topic?
Yes. Now, and, and now that this can become
an empirical issue and, and one that's legitimately studied,
uh the mental health of sex workers. Um AND
there's, there, there's a stereotype that, that they all
must be miserable because, well, gee whiz they gotta
be miserable and I'm sure that there are sex
workers who are miserable. Uh uh It does happen.
No question about that. I mean, there are, um,
you know, I was a lawyer all my career
and I guarantee you that there are, that there
are legal secretaries out there who are miserable uh
in, in, in sex work, you if you have
a sex worker who was born in a culture
where it is intensively stigmatized. But now she, for
whatever reason, now she is taking money, she may
very well feel miserable, that may very well happen.
But what is important from a legal perspective is,
is what's the generalization, what characterizes sex work? And
the, the empirical evidence is that, is that mental
health issues don't do not characterize sex. You do.
Uh There's re empirical research and they, they found
uh uh a good number of sex workers say,
I mean, in some states, there are many studies
uh uh but just, just to point to a
few of them, I mean, there are some studies
uh especially of indoor sex workers. And also, you
know, sex work has enhanced my self esteem. That
notion is, is utterly incredible. Too many conventional Western
people. It, they just cannot believe that, but that's
what you find now. Not all of them, of
course not. And, and, and there's, there's much less
of that kind of talk. If you're talking about
women who work on the street, there's a great
deal of variation uh in sex work. Uh Barbara
Brent studied brothels in Nevada. And uh and her,
her conclusion was look, when you, when you have
problems with the emotional life of a sex worker
as a general matter, they stem from two things.
What? And we're talking about brothels in Nevada. So
we're talking about women. One, she's not getting enough
clients, she doesn't make enough money. Two stigma, those
are the two factors that are behind most emotional
or mental difficulties when they do arise. And you
know, she, she quotes two of them. 111 sex
worker says, you know, this was just terrible and
nobody should ever do sex work. Uh And then
another one says this was the best thing that
ever happened to me. I love it. And we
just have to accept the fact that there are
all kinds of sex workers doing all kinds of
work for all kinds of reasons. And it is
not true that mental health issues characterize them. And
when you do have mental health issues, the odds
are that you're going to find that it's basically
business related, not having enough customers. What the stigma
that they have to live in? We've created a
world that stigmatizes these people and then we scratch
our heads and say, gee why do they feel
that what is the reason?
And when it comes to that point on stigma,
isn't it the case that prohibitionists or abolitionists either
from the conservative end of the spectrum or the
more pro progressive end of the spectrum? Aren't they
all also contributing to the stigmatization of sex workers
with the kinds of claims they make?
Of course, I mean, uh and, and, and, and
of course they did, like I say, it is
evolving overall, I would agree they're contributing to stigma.
Now, now there are some who would argue, well,
we're just saying they're victims and their clients are
evil. Well, you're certainly stigmatizing the clients. Uh, AND
there's, there is a, it can be said they're
stigmatizing the sex workers too. There was research done
in the Netherlands about how sex workers feel about
their work and they have complaints, they have complaints.
And so you read and you look at the,
the they pull them, well, what are their complaints
and their complaints are exactly the same complaints that
employees have. You know, I wanna make more money.
I wanna have more flexible hours. And then another
thing they say is the government treats us like
victims. That is their complaint. Those are sex workers
themselves complaining about that. Uh So that's a good
reason to say even, you know, even the more,
more contemporary victimizing pp uh philosophy that just continues
stigma uh in a different form.
And another very interesting thing uh or uh something
that I find really curious uh about the arguments
coming from the prohibitionists is that one very common
thing they claim is that prostitutes in general do
not have a choice. That is they, they, they're
basically implying that no one, if they were not
in specific kinds of circumstances that forced them into
sex work would from their own free will choose
this kind of work. I mean, I isn't that
also a little bit condescending.
It's, it, it, it's really outrageous what poor habits
have done with the notion of consent. And of
course, the notion just stripped sex workers of any
kind of agency. Oh, but you know what, like,
like the word exploitation, the word consent has now
been virtually destroyed as a useful and honest term
to use whenever we're talking about sex work. The,
the argument, for example, that, well, she didn't consent
to sex work because she needed the money. What
I'm sure that's true. Uh And you know, that
does not mean that, that she did not consent
to this work. But if you continue to use
the word consent like that, if you find any
pressure, economic or otherwise, then you're going to use
non consent. I if you're going to use that
word like that, then the only fair way to
talk about consent is in a comparative way. And
instead of taking a sex worker and say, does
she consent? You should take a sex worker and
say, how does she compare to this other person
who makes life's decisions based on economic pressures or
any other pressures? I have, I have a lady
from Guatemala who doesn't speak very good English and
I speak to her in Spanish a bit and
she cleans my house every once in a while
and I pay her to do that. You know,
I don't think she really, really enjoys mopping the
floors to my house. She does it because she
needs the money and I try to give her
a reasonable pay for that. That does not mean
that I'm a slave driver. It doesn't mean that
she's a slave. If you take, you take lawyers.
I was a lawyer the last, you know, why
did I do it? Well, I did it because
I wasn't independently wealthy. I couldn't, you know, retire
to Tahiti and put my feet up. I had
to work for a living that does not mean
that I didn't consent to it. That's not how
we use the word consent. Uh In, in Norway,
they uh I hope things have calmed down a
bit but they're really, really into trafficking and trafficking.
Forceful pro it's a very, very big evil. We
can get to that later on. That is not
consensual prosecution, but they're trying to attack trafficking and
they arrested a guy and charged him with trafficking.
And I believe they convicted him of trafficking. And
that's because he brought in migrants and I believe
they came in from, from eastern European country, maybe
from Romania. And, and they had the women testify
and the women said no, we did this voluntarily.
We chose to do this, but they still convicted
him of trafficking. You know why? Because the court
said in Romania, they didn't have economic opportunities. Therefore,
they did not come of their own free will.
Therefore, you are a trafficker. Now, just think of
that way of reasoning it's just appalling. What if,
what if he had brought them from Romania and
he had hired them to, to clean toilets in
public restrooms and that was their best economic option.
Would he have been arrested? No, they would have
thanked him for giving a job. So there's no,
now, now I, I'm not saying that sex work
and cleaning toilets are the same thing. They're very,
very different. They're very, very different consequences. But consent
is not the difference. Consent is the thing. And
the people get very, very uh extreme in these
notions. I mean, there's one prohibition who said, you
know, the money coerces the sex. Therefore, it's rape
that is just irrational. But she can get away
with saying it because it feeds into a stereotype
and what people want to believe and I've gone
on a long time but it is, it, it
is just so upsetting what people can get away
with when they're talking about consent because, because true
trafficking is a very, very bad thing and it
is very, very hurtful and they want to pretend
that consensual prostitution is trafficking. Uh THAT'S just an
awful thing to do. And it's, it's, it's intellectually
dishonest.
So when it comes to the point of uh
work, uh sex work, but also work more generally.
And also at a certain point there, you mentioned
the trafficking. Isn't it interesting that uh when it
comes to other activities, like for example, construction work
there are certain places oo on earth where people
are trafficked into that sort into that form of
work. And there are also other examples of course,
agriculture and so on. But people in those specific
case only worry about ending that trafficking and not
ending the activity itself. But in this specific case
of sex work, they take one step forward and
argue that if there's any trafficking at all, then
the solution is just to prohibit any kind of
sex work. Isn't it interesting?
Well, yes. And, and that's true. And, and if
you, you know, if you focus on all the
emotion behind stereotypes of sex work, it's not surprising.
It's, it's, it's not reasonable at all. But it's
not surprising because when you're talking about sex work,
people have so much philosophical animosity that they will
jump on the solution of let's do away with
all sex work even though it's not reasonable, even
though like you say, they would never say that
about construction work or, or agriculture. Uh uh YOU
know, they want to do away with sex work.
1st, 2nd, they want to do away with trafficking.
And so they use trafficking as a way to
do away with sex. Uh Now you can get
into, I mean, you can have an honest argument
with, with a pragmatic person about, well, you know,
is it true that, you know, once you, once
you decriminalize it, more sex work happens and if
more sex work happens and more trafficking happens. And
so simply as a, as a statistical matter, uh
don't, don't the prohibitionists have a point that that
and when you're talking about sex work, the only
remedy is really do away with it. And, and
I can accept that as an honest concern and
one that has to be addressed, the point is
it has been addressed and people have looked at
it, people have empirically looked at decriminalized contexts and
no trafficking does not increase in those jurisdictions. We
have jurisdictions. We, we, you know, we don't have
to just speculate about this. We have New Zealand,
we have most of Australia uh A as two
of the two of the clearest examples of decriminalization
and in other jurisdictions, you have legalization who is
heavily regulated and you do not find an increase
in trafficking uh that you have to go through
statistics. And once again, you have to be very,
very careful that you keep people honest when you're
in this debate because if you're not careful what
you're going to find, if you're confronted with someone
who says, why of course trafficking increased and what
do they mean? They mean that sex work increased,
but they believe that no one can consent to
sex work. Therefore, all sex work is trafficking. And,
and you know, in some, actually, in some jurisdictions,
if you have an increase in sex work, they
will claim that's an increase in trafficking. So you
always have to be on guard. Uh uh But
if you're, if you're serious about what trafficking means
as force or fraud or underage, it's just not
true. New Zealand is one of the clearest examples
of decriminalization and, and they were very serious about
finding out what would happen. New Zealanders are ordinary
Western people. You know, they weren't, they weren't out
on some radical binge and, and, and they wanted
to make sure that this was gonna be ok,
that there were no bad effects from this radical
thing they were doing of decriminalizing five years after
and I believe they did another 1, 10 years
after that is government sponsored review to find out
what the effects were. And they, the end result
will say that sex workers are better off, they're
not worse off, they're not being trafficked, they're better
off. Now, the word trafficking means that back then
it meant something different. In New Zealand, you have
to be careful about the statistics. Uh AND, and,
and, and traffic trafficking did not, did not go
up and certainly not in the legalized uh environment.
Uh But if, if, if say, say Americans and
Western Europeans have a broader definition of trafficking. Even
if you use that broader definition, you go to
New Zealand, they still say, look, they're better off,
it improved their lives. It did not, it did
not hurt them. You go to Australia has, has
a long history of decriminalization. It does not increase
trafficking. The state of Victoria in Australia, they had
legalized. Prostitution means it's regulated, it's not decriminalized. There
are all kinds of, you know, they surrounded with
all kinds of all kinds of regulations and they,
and they had that system for years. They know
about that system and you know what they finally
decided in 2021 let's just decriminalize it. That will
be better, just the opposite of what you would
think if loosening restrictions increase trafficking. So, so for,
for, you know, for the honest person who's actually
concerned about trafficking as an empirical reality, we have
a lot of data for it. We need to
keep fighting trafficking. There's no question about that, you
know, but the way to do it is to
decriminalize, decriminalizing does not exacerbate trafficking. And it is
probably the case that it will help. I what
what you need to do is to think of
the situation where, where sex workers are no longer
afraid of the police, they don't hide from the
police, the police are their protectors. And if they
face violence, they can call the police and the
sex workers will be the ones who will know
about trafficking. If it's happening, sex workers have no
desire for there to be trafficking. Why would, why
would an adult consensual sex worker be interested and
down the street? Some 17 year old being forced
into sex work? If the police have a good
working relationship with sex workers, it will help in
the badly against trafficking. I mean, the, the the
problem of trafficking is vastly exaggerated um because people
conflated with just ordinary prostitution. Uh And, and so
it is uh it, it's extremely exaggerated. Nevertheless, it's
there and if it happens one time, it's a
very bad thing and you need to stop it.
No question about that. But decriminalization is not the
problem. Decriminalization helps matters. It doesn't hurt matters.
So, let me ask you now a little bit
about some of the words and concepts that the
prohibitionists use in their discourse. So earlier, even you
mentioned the a word such as exploitation. So when
it comes to claims made by prohibitionists in the
context, in the context of sex work, does exploitation
have a concrete meaning?
Well, now, even, even in, in ordinary life in
say economics, exploitation is, is uh uh it is
a bit loose. Uh But you know, if, if,
if you're talking about uh workers being exploited, uh
you know, well enough what's being meant and it's,
it's, it's so it's a useful term. Uh I
in sex work uh i it's not uh and
it's interesting to speculate as to why people sort
of sense that must mean something. And, and I
can, I can only imagine a very traditional view,
you know, of, of the female as being a
sexual commodity. This is an irony here. You know,
it, it, it, it, it's not the pimp who's
saying who's talking about about. But it's, it's, it's
the government, it's prohibitionist treating a woman as a
sexual commodity. And then if you take that commodity
without compensation, then you're exploiting her. But money can
never be compensation, compensation. Some kind of ideas like
this. I'm speculating and I'm trying to, I'm trying
to put myself in their minds what they must
think about. I mean, and there are prohibitionists who
talk about, you know, sexuality is inherent to a
woman's personhood. It's a very interesting thing to say
because you don't say that about a man. Uh
uh And, and so II, I think that there
are a lot of, a lot of women who
might think about that and decide not to go
in that direction, but some have, some have and
that's the best I can do to, to try
to put myself in the frame of mind of
people who say sex work is always exploitation, you
know, in the state of Washington, in my country,
they had a law against sex work and they
used the term I believe it was prostitution that
they used, they amended the law so that it
says the same thing except they say exploited individual,
even in the codified war, they decided to use
the word exploitation, exploited person, you know, and you
know, my suggestion, tongue in cheek, tongue in cheek,
suggestion is, you know, some client who is being
charged with exploitation should go into court and should
defend himself by saying yes, I paid her for
money. I'm a client of apostate. But in an
exploiter and see what the judge says. Now it's
tongue in cheek. He's not gonna get very far
doing that. But those are the ideas that you
have and the way the word exploitation has been
totally wrecked for political purposes.
And uh uh still on the topic of exploitation
and also powerlessness. I've heard and read some feminist
sex workers. And even if they are not sex
workers, some feminists who are, uh let's call them
sex positive. So they are not against sex work.
Uh CLAIMING the opposite of what the prohibitionists claim.
There is. Some of them say that no, actually
sex work or they look at sex work as
a form of empowerment and of them being in
control of their own work because they establish their
own rules so that there's also that feminist perspective
out there,
right? I'm a straight male. Mhm. That's the way
I imagine. I imagine, you know, if there's a
woman and I want to have sex with her,
she gets to set the terms. I'm not the
one with power she is now. So then that
makes a lot of sense to me. And there
are women who are sex workers who talk about
empowerment. No question. There are, uh like I said,
at the beginning, I, I generalizations are dangerous. Uh
I don't want to generalize and say that sex
work is always empowering or it's never empowering. Uh,
IT was a, a very respected author, Ronald Weitzer
who writes on sex where a sociologist and he
says, and, and, you know, he, uh, he, he's
very good, he's very good on this. Uh, AND
he says that, you know, there, there, there are
paradigms and there is the, there's the victim paradigm
and there's the empowerment paradigm and people select which
paradigm they want. And he says, you know, you
shouldn't do either one, you shouldn't sell yourself to
either one. There's, he calls it the polymorphous paradigm,
which means you have a lot of different people
doing a lot of different things and a lot
of different contexts. Why can't we just accept that
fact? Um And, and so, you know, uh what
can I say to me? It sounds empowering, but
I'm sure that, you know, for a lot of
women, uh do not see it that way. And
um uh that's fine, that should not affect the
law and it should not affect my attitude toward
them or my stigma either way. I, you know,
it's none of my business,
right? So another kind of word that prohibitionists sometimes
use is coercion. So they say that they associate
sex work with coercion. They say that the only
reason why they, of course, most of the time
they're talking about women, uh The only reason why
women go into sex work is because they are
coerced into it. What, what do they mean by
that?
Well, you know, I don't like to think I
need, you know, I, I need to constrain my
criticism of people I don't agree with. But at
a certain point, I mean, you, you, you have
to talk about honesty. I mean, to say that
sex work is intrinsically coercive. So blatantly flies into
facts, the empirical fact that, that you just can't
eat, eat, you can't take it seriously as an
empirical proposition. You have to take it seriously because
of its emotional content and the emotional reaction that
people will have. Now, if you talk to sex
workers, you realize that no, they're not being coerced.
If you just think about sex work, you say
no, they're not being coerced, they're deciding to take
money. Oh, and, and, and so you, it's hard
to know what to say to a person who
says, well, it's just all coercive if they're trying
to be empirical, if they're trying to say, you
know, all those women out there are coerced. Well,
then there's an empirical answer to that and it
turns out you're just wrong. It's just not true
in any ordinary meaning of the word coerced. It's
not true and we can get back into the
issue of consent. Yeah, of course, they're doing it
because they need money. Uh But it's simply not
true. If by coercion, you mean something more abstract,
you just mean, well, that, uh you know, intrinsically,
it's the inscription of the patriarchy and they have
power and the woman in the sex change gets
a, it is stigmatized more than the man. And
I think that that's behind what a lot of
what people are talking about that doesn't translate into
coercion that translates into a real problem about stigma.
But it doesn't translate into coercion. You know, people
like to use people like to sound sophisticated and
talk about power dynamics and they'll talk about in
this sex work relationship. There's a power differential. One
party is more powerful than the other. And what
they really mean is the man is more powerful
than the woman. Well, first of all, they, they,
they just like to use the word power because
in this case, it's a bit vague. But, you
know, I mean, I can go a long way.
I mean, like I, I, I will imagine, although
I don't know if it's true or not, but
I will imagine that the man always has a
lot more money than the woman does. The man
has a way of getting a lot more money.
The man can write a, a letter to the
editor of the newspaper and it will be published
a lot sooner than the woman. So he has
that social power, economic power. So there is a
power differential. And what they want to do is
they want to say there's a power differential and
then they want to stop talking like they've made
a point. What is the point? I don't know
what the point is. I, I think the point
is they want to insinuate that, that power is
being used to coerce the woman, but you have
to make that case. You don't just say there's
a powerful man there. I mean, the powerful man
buys a cup of coffee at, at a coffee
shop and the woman who provides him the coffee
doesn't have power like he does. He's got a
lot of power, but that doesn't mean he's coercing
her. And as a matter of fact, the powerful
man, you know, paying the woman, you can imagine
him is that being one part of his life
where he doesn't have that much power and you
know, this woman is gonna limit him. You can
imagine it that way just as much as you
can imagine something else. So, so, so you can
talk about power dynamics and you can talk about
a power differential and, and you may have a
lot to say there may be, you know, you,
you know, you may, you may look at the
evidence and say gee whiz in almost all the
cases, the man is more powerful than the woman
but but you haven't made an argument yet. You
know, that does that mean coercion that does not
mean lack of consent. Uh You know, i it
ju it just means that there are some jobs
that are more lucrative than sex work jobs. Although
if you, the researchers who have, who have, who
have researched the money angle and found out that
there are a great many people, middle class women,
young women who do sex work because the money
is just good. That's a whole other issue too.
The issue of coercion, oh, that's just blatantly flies
in the face of reality. Reality is concerned by
research. What can you say?
So there are also middle class women that go
into sex work. I'm asking you because uh we
have also this very common idea that it's only
poor women who choose or in the words of
the prohibitionists are coerced into sex work. So, but
that's also not entirely true.
Right. Well, I, I use the word middle class.
I'm, I'm thinking about 11 researcher who determined a
lot of middle class and young people are going
into sex work. I hate to make any bold
pronouncements based just on one piece of research. OK.
Sociology, you know, the more the better. Uh BUT
that was what that that person found and other
people have found. The the economics are quite surprising
and there was once one study that was done
just to figure out why the money is so
good. Now, of course, the phrase so good is,
is a relative term. Um But there, there is
a stereotype of women, uh sex workers as workers
who work on the street that stereotype I think
is wearing a little thin, but the old fashioned
stereotype has them as street walkers. The phrase street
walker, she's walking on the street. She's poor, very
poor. She's addicted to drugs. She needs money and
she will do anything to get it. But yeah,
that, that's a horrible picture and she needs help.
No question about it. Uh, BUT you know, the,
the, the numbers that I've seen are that about
20% of sex work is sex work on the
street. That means 80% of sex work is indoors.
80%. Now, that could be a brothel and massage
parlor, but also be escort agencies, right where the
woman is living in her apartment and she gets
a call, uh, from, not from a client but
from her madam. And we need to address the
phrase madam here because this madam is more like
the sex worker employee than anything else. And the
madam says I've got a client for you. So
and so such as you. And she says, ok,
yeah, now, I don't know how much she makes,
but she makes a lot more than the street
walker, I'm sure. And, uh, there is, uh, I
believe, I believe, yeah, I quote her in the
book Norma Almodovar and she was one of the
first ex sex workers that I interviewed and I
talked to. Yeah, I know, you know, she was
high end escort and, you know, she's playing around
with celebrities and wealthy people. Uh, I, I, you
know, I don't have dollar figures for you but
that was not a poor lifestyle for her. And
it's just not true that, well, the 20% don't
represent everybody. We should pay attention to the 20%.
Uh, WE should make sure that they're protected and
for God's sake, you know, can you give him
a job, maybe all kinds of things you can
do with the 20% but they don't represent the
80%. It's, you know, it's, it's not true that
this is, uh you know, destitute women looking for
sustenance that empirically is just not true.
So, and what can we say about violence in
sex work? Because one of the common claims made
by prohibitionists is that if not all, at least
most sex workers are victims of violence, that there's
a very high prevalence of violence in sex work.
Is that true or not?
Well, uh once again, we have to appreciate the
fact that there's, there's no one thing that's sex
work. They're all different kinds of sex workers doing
all different kinds of work in all different contexts
now. And not surprisingly, most of the violence and
violence does occur and we have to face that
fact that violence occurs in sex work. Most of
it occurs on the street, for street workers, street
workers are vulnerable. Ok. Uh If you are talking
about escorts, it is not present as a matter
of fact, I would venture to say that it's
rare. Um, I interviewed, uh, a sex worker who
had also was a, was a madam. And so
she was, she had very knowledge and a great
deal of knowledge about the sex workers who were
working for her. And, um, one time one of
the girls complained that a guy was a little
rough about it. Um, AND there are some other
statistics, I don't have it on my fingertips. Uh,
BUT they show that you get the higher echelon
violence is just not a big factor. One researcher.
Now, let me see. Once again, I don't have
my fingertips but, but she compared sex workers with
orderlies in a hospital and she, she found the
orderlies were subject to violence more often than the
sex worker. You know, and that does not trivialize
the violence of a sex worker. Of course, that's
a bad thing. We have to make sure that
sex workers have police protection and sex workers respect
them when they call for work. But we, but,
you know, if you're talking to a person who
believes it says that, you know, violence is endemic
are, it's just, it's not true, it's not true.
And here again, there's empirical studies about violence and,
and it is there no question about it, but
you have to be careful, you know what you're
talking about. Uh, AND it is not endemic. Uh
It is not pervasive, I don't think you would
use the word pervasive, uh, for violence and sex
work. But what, what interests me even more and
how much violence goes on. What interests me as
a lawyer is, what is the effect of our
laws on violence? Right now? We've had, we have
studies that show when you prohibit sex work, you
increase violence. If you decriminalize sex work, that itself
helps to protect sex workers. Yes. Uh, AND there's
more than one research on this topic, more than
11 example, which was astonishing to me. One, once
again, this, this, you know, conventional guy in Rhode
Island, a state in the United States, they, they
decriminalized indoor sex work. Now that this is a
weird example considered by accident, they really didn't intend
to. But, you know, the legislators are amending legislation
and the prohibition on sex work only applied to
street work. So for six years from 2003, 2009,
indoor sex work was decriminalized. Whoa. Now they finally
got their act together in 2009 and the prohibitionist
came in and no doubt they were screaming about
it. And so they reinstated prohibition. So now Rhode
Island is another typical state where it's all prohibited.
But for nine years, for nine years, it was
legal indoors indoors. So, you know what a wonderful
empirical experiment, right? Look, you get nine years, it's
legal indoors. What happened? Uh One of the things
that happened was if the population at large, not
just sex workers at large, the rates of gonorrhea
went down 40%. Nobody can really explain these results.
But there, there and, and as far as rape,
the instances of rape at large went down, 30%
went down 30% when it was legalized indoors. Now,
that's just one example, it's very, very hard to
tease out the cause and effect here. But that's
just one example of research showing that you don't,
you, it doesn't solve or mitigate the violence problem
because you make sex work itself illegal. It just
doesn't work that way.
So another type of claims that we hear very
often from prohibitionists is that they say that uh
all sex workers are in some way or another
victimized by their clients. Sometimes they even make the
claim that all sex work involves uh or is
or involve sexual assault. So, but taking into account
the sex workers, you interviewed, what did they have
to say about the kinds of people that their,
their clients were? And how did they describe their
interactions with them?
This same, this same woman who is a sex
worker and then became a madam that I interviewed
and, and she put it very, very succinctly uh
uh as her experience as a madam, she said,
you know, I asked her about clients, you know,
how does sex workers feel about their clients? What,
what kind of people are? They said, look, 5%
of your clients are guys that you hate. You
never want to see them go again. Even if
you're making money from them, they just, you know,
they, they don't like them, don't like them at
all. Another 5% of your clients are guys and,
and she's speaking from a woman's perspective, a woman
providing to me 5% of your clients, you just
love them. They really like the guy, you know,
I mean, sex workers are human beings and they
really like the guy. They really do. The rest
are 90% 90% are just not good or bad.
It's just work. It's just a guy, another guy
and he's ok. But that's all. Now from everything
that I've read that seems to be a very
accurate picture that you can drop. Um, uh, SEX
workers will say. Yeah, sometimes they're shitty but most
of the time they're not, they ask, they ask
one woman, you know, if you had, if you
didn't have to do sex work for money, what
would you do? Marvelous question? Right. Gee. She doesn't
have to do it for money. What would she
say? She would say? You know, I would go
out fewer times in a week but she would
still go out, you know, I wouldn't go out
all the time. Yeah. Take it easy. But I
would go out like, I don't know what she
said, maybe two or three times a week because
she enjoys the power like uh OK, that, that's,
that's another, that's another uh uh one example. Uh
SO, you know, in my book, I could go
through and I could point to everyone who said
their clients were just fine but, but, but as
you say, that's not a representative sample in, in
a, in a rigorous statistical way. So you don't
have a number that you can reveal and say,
well, that this percentage of clients are really bad
people. But the idea that, that men who victimize
you uh are, are, are characterized clients. That's just
not true. That's just not true. It is not
true. There's one, there's 11 woman who uh she
did a TED talk, she did a TED talk.
She was one of the plaintiffs in a famous
lawsuit in Canada, which got the laws, loss loss
changed up there. And she had this wonderful way
of putting it. She said, you know, who are
sex workers? Well, sex workers, we're, we're just normal
people, you know, and you meet us every day,
the grocery store and there are clients, clients are
just normal people too. You know, there's an accountant,
there's a lawyer, there's this guy, there's that guy
and i it's not true that they control everything
that happens. But you know, it uh uh it,
in other words, it's ordinary, the, the, the relationship
is much more ordinary than people want to think.
Uh So what do you conclude from all this
clients? Are not victimizer. There are clients who are
criminals. There are clients who are murderers for God's
sake. It does happen. But that doesn't characterize clients
as a matter of fact, another, another guy throw
this in another sex worker and, and more than
one sex worker told me this, a lot of
clients who want to talk, they wanna use a
sex workers therapist and one of them in particular
was telling me about this. She's actually uh she
actually has a degree in physics and she edits
physics notebooks. Just, you know, you gotta tell that
to your friend who says that all sex workers
are coerced because they need the money. They don't
have any options and it's just crazy. But she
was telling me, yeah, you know, I, I get,
I get clients who come by uh one, once
she's not just talking about one client plan will
come by and we'll sit down there and we'll,
and we'll talk and we'll chat. He likes to
talk and, and she says, you know, I realize
II I gotta let him know, you know, ti
time is time is passing and you know, your
hour or you to uh you know, it, it's
almost up uh just to let him know and
he says, no, no, I just, I didn't wanna
talk. Let's just keep talking. Those kinds of images
are images that conventional people never get. They never,
they never see that picture of a client but
it's out there, they need to see it. Uh,
DID the sex workers you interviewed, uh, uh, did
any one of them mentioned or complained about being
objectified?
No. Uh, I mean, that phrase is sort of
a infinitely malleable tool, I suppose. Um, uh HUH.
Well, the answer is no. And it, it would
be odd if they did a, um, prohibitionists who
want to use that term and say, well, sex
workers are bad because, because uh once again, it's
a man and a woman and the woman is
being objectified and you just have to throw up
your hands and you simply have to ask what,
what and how they mean by that. If you
mean that the only reason the man is paying
her is to have sex with her. Well, that
may be true. It also may be true that
the woman doesn't want him to be interested in
anything else. There are, you know, uh sex workers
and, and, and she may be in this book
or it may be in another article talking about,
well, one of the more difficult things in her
work is managing the expectations of her client, clients,
clients who want to get to know her too
much. You know, our, our clients who AAA and,
and then there's another part of the job which
is emotional work. Someone will sell the girlfriend experience,
which means, which means at least you simulate an
emotional attachment, affection and kissing Well, I, I can
imagine very well that, that there's a woman who,
you know, doesn't want any of that. Just let's
just have sex and be done with it. She's
the one who, who wants that. It's just as
plausible to believe that the woman in this transaction
really wants to limit it. Just a sexual act
as it is to think of the man as
doing that. There's, there's a lot of literature on
men who don't want just the sex. They want
some uh an un effective relationship, playful kissing, simulating
a girlfriend um or just talking for. And once
again, there are all kinds, there are all kinds.
Uh And if, if by objectify, you mean just
sex. Well, OK, that's a context and we just
sex is OK, if you mean they're always like
that. Uh They're always, always sort of not considerate
of the woman. Is that what you mean? Well,
yeah, I'm sure there are rude clients out there.
No question about it. Does that characterize sex work?
No. Uh There, there are guys who are timid.
There are guys who don't know what to do.
There are guys who want kinky stuff. There are
guys who just want to talk. Uh There are
guys who are rude just because they're kind of
stupid and don't know any better. They're all guys.
There are people, you know, they are human beings
but nothing about sex work. Uh Nothing that's intrinsic
about sex work.
Right. So another type of claim that uh prohibitionists
make have to has to do with power dominance
where they say or claim that uh sex work
is the product of male domination and patriarchy. They
use words like that. So I I mean, is
there any way of empirically testing such a claim?
Not precisely simply because the climate itself is not
precise? Uh And, and the best you can do
is just, is just to try to speculate on
why people say things like that. Since, since, as
I've mentioned, empirically and talking to sex workers, there's
no basis to say that whatsoever. Uh And, and,
and perhaps the it is so I, so I
speculate and, and well, there's the old fashioned notion
of women, women's place is in the home, a
man's place is to go out and make a
living that then that then spawns the idea of
women are economically dependent on men. Women are vulnerable
to men and which is obviously very true in,
in many respects. And so then, then your next
thought is, well, you, you just think about all
women as being vulnerable to men. And the way
a woman survives is to attach herself to a
man. And then if you have that in your
head, and then you say, well, prostitution, there is
a way for a woman to survive, but she's
not getting marriage out of it, which in this,
this very old fashioned way of thinking is, is
the prize, the goal that she needs to get
in order to economically survive. And so if you
think that way, then you think of the man
as dangling economic viability in front of a woman
and she's out to try to get it. Now,
you have a picture of a power relationship that's
very unhealthy and, and the man dominates the woman
economically. And that's the best I could do to
try to figure out why women would say, well,
sex work is spawned by the patriarchy. It makes
as much sense to say that sex work is
spawned by women who don't want to be attached
to a man, women who want other options and
men who discover their own power and decide they're
going to use it. That's an equally plausible explanation
of the genesis of sex work. Uh And then,
you know, there's no substitute for, you know, forgetting
all the theories and they just sitting down and
talking to sex workers concretely and finding out what
benefits them in their lives and what doesn't. And
if you want, if you wanna talk about where
it all comes from, that is, that is a
very, very difficult thing to do. Uh IS, you
know, sex work has been in human cultures for
a very, very long time. Women getting consideration for
sex is a normal and prevalent thing whether you
think it's a good thing or not and only,
you know, explicit monetary payment is called prostitution and,
and, and triggers this kind of stigma. So, you
know, if you wanna, if you wanna go into,
you know, where does it all come from? It
would be an enormously complicated enterprise. And I suggest
that it would be irrelevant for what kind of
laws you pass today about what sex workers are
telling you today about what helps them or doesn't
help them.
So we've been talking about some of the main
claims made by prohibitionists and also what sex workers
and also their clients have to say in their
own words about their own experiences. But uh there's
also as I mentioned earlier. So, uh there are
also some feminists out there that are, I will
call them here. Sex positive there is they are,
they support the normalization of sex work and they
are for pornography and all of that. What do
you think about uh the role that they could
play in this sort of debates if they are
not sex workers themselves?
Well, uh I was gonna say they play a
great work until you added the caveat, not sex
workers themselves. A lot, a lot of the, a
lot of the very powerful voices out there are
women who have been sex workers. Uh But I'm
sure not all of them and, and I'm sure
they would all consider themselves to be feminists and
have every right to consider those to be feminists
and their voices are very, very impressive. Uh, uh,
I simply didn't write a book about them. I
wrote a book about sex negative people. Ah, and,
and I simply wasn't talking about them. They are
out there and they are very, very impressive. I
mean, uh, uh, you know, Caitlin Bailey is, has
started the old pros. I've listened to her a
few times. She sounds most intelligent, articulate person. You
can imagine. Uh, Norman G almodovar that I quote
in my book. Uh uh SHE has, she has
written her own book. She started her own organization,
Ella A Ella, I believe. And that's the only
name I know her by. Uh SHE has been
a sex worker and she calls, she calls herself
a data scientist now. And every time I listen
to her, I say that's an accurate description. She
is a, she's a data fiend and, and she
does all kinds of uh uh all kinds of
statistical work about, about sex workers. Um And so
they're out there. Uh THEY have strong voices and
um there are uh you know, they are, they
are, they are leading the charge and a great
work, a great deal of work uh uh to
get legislators to either modify their prohibitions or to
decriminalize sex work. And this is going on in
Rhode Island, New York, Vermont. Um And you know,
they're, you, you, you go on youtube and you
can look up, you know, sex work legislation and
you will see sex work positivists lined up speaking
to these legislative bodies and um so they're very
encouraging.
So, since earlier, we talked a little bit about
sex trafficking or the issue of traffic in the
sex industry, taking into account the that serious risk.
What do you think should be done then to
prevent it as much as possible?
Well, uh you decriminalize consensual sex with and make
allies of sex workers and then a big, big
problem, we get honest statistics so that you know
what you're up against and then you can fight
it and then you can fight it. Uh um
YOU know, and, and you need to fight it
but you'll have allies and sex workers, you will
know, you will know if you have good numbers,
you will know where it's hap happening and you
may get a handle on why it's happening. Uh
11 problem with numbers, for example is every time
we have a Super Bowl in the United States,
there are people who run around and say, oh
no, now you're going to have a lot of
prostitution and a lot of trafficking. So then uh
uh what will happen is you will, you will
form a anti trafficking, law enforcement task force and
it's all about trafficking and you'll go out and
you make a big AAA big production of this
when all the crowds here for the Super Bowl
and then you'll read in the paper about arrests
that were made by the anti trafficking people. Sorry,
we made 40 arrests. And that's it. Well, so
the ordinary person reading the paper says the anti
trafficking force made 40 arrests. Oh, we've been saved
from traffickers. How good. Well, they don't tell you
that the people they arrested were traffickers. They just
say the anti trafficking force made the arrest. Well,
the only thing the anti trafficking force is doing
is going out there harassing prostitutes because, well, somewhere
there must be trafficking. So they go on, they
arrest a whole bunch of consenting protests and their
arrests, they really were arrested. There really were 40
of them and you know, maybe they found one
person who was 17 years old instead of 18
years old, that's underage. So that, that counts as
a trafficking victim and that's what happened. So uh
now what I, what I'm saying is you have
to get honest numbers about what the problem really
is. If you can get a handle with the
problem, what the problem really is and you decriminalize
prostitute. Now we can rationally fight traffic. And one
other thing I should add, there are a lot
of people who believe that a person who is
a migrant to your country and a sex worker
must be trafficked. And in the United States immigration,
it's a big, big hot issue and illegal immigration
is a big, big hot issue. And it uh
and so when, when you see, when you, when
you find a person who's a migrant, especially from
a poor country and they're doing sex work. Then
immediately people think of trafficking after all, think of
the word trafficking. It must be movement actually, legally,
it doesn't mean movement. It's nothing to do with
movement. But that's the word that's in people's lives.
Trafficking. You traffic a migrant and so now they're
doing prostitution. So you arrest the migrant for prostitution.
Now, you think you've done something about trafficking nonsense?
She is like she is like any other sex
worker. She's, she's trying, she's trying to find the
best economic option that she can. One economic action
was to sneak into the United States. The second
economic option was to sell sex. That's what's happening,
that's not trafficking. So you have all this corruption
of traffic trafficking statistics. So you really don't know
what to find or where to find. Fix that
decriminalize work with sex workers and you fight trafficking.
So just for this last part of our conversation,
I have a couple of questions for you specifically
about the clients because we've been focusing mostly on,
for example, how sex workers are stigmatized. But in
the case of the clients, in what ways are
they stigmatized? And what are some of the most
common ideas that people have about the clients of
sex workers?
Well, they're stigmatized. Uh I think the, the advantage
that a client has is in the long run,
he may be able to hide the fact that
he's a client a lot better than the woman
can hide the fact that she's a sex worker.
But there's no question that women are subjected to
a much greater stereotype of a spoiled identity, the
old fashioned view of sexual purity and the old
fashioned view of sexual quantity and being destroyed. And
now your identity is destroyed and, and you can
never go back and recover all that kind of
crap, uh, is out there that a woman has
to face but men are, men are stigmatized. I
mean, uh, in the old fashioned way, they're stigmatized
because they're seen as doing something icky. You're having
sex with a prostitute who's, who's, you know, very
undesirable. You may get s may get AAA disease
from her and you're a loser. Only a loser
would have to pay for sex. Nowadays, it's evolving
and, and the evolving stereotype is, you must be
harming someone. You must be harming someone because you
paid for sex. Uh, AND that, uh, that does
not compare to the stereotype of a woman who's
somehow been branded for life in a spoiled identity.
It doesn't compare with that. But nevertheless, it's a,
it's a real, it's a real stereotype that, uh,
that men suffer if they, if they, they pay
for sex and they don't want to say it
and it doesn't, uh, it doesn't increase your, it's
not supposed to increase your self esteem. But, you
know, iiii, I was happy to find the clients
talking. And you'll notice, uh, this is apropos to,
to stigma. It's actually easier to find sex workers
to interview than it is to find clients. All
right. You know. Uh uh, SO I was fortunate
in finding, uh, client statements that I was able
to put the book and, um, you know, what
comes through is their ordinariness. That's a theme that
I think of is ordinary, uh, for conventionally minded
people. There is a big chasm between real life
and sex work and sex work has got to
be something really, really strange. It's either a really,
really bad thing or it's a really, really empowering
thing or, you know, the woman is really, really
undesirable or she's really, really desirable but it's, it's
different and that's, that's what's not true. Uh, uh,
SEX workers and clients are ordinary people. Yeah. The
sex that they engage in is enjoyable for ordinary
reasons and it is surprising how little money changes
that and that's very, very difficult for conventional people
to believe. Um, I digressed a little bit there,
uh, with the clients, they suffer stereotypes. It's not
like a woman's stereotype. And what they have to
say is, gee, I'm happy that, you know, that
I found this, I found this woman and, and
you can find, you can find, uh uh and
then talk about bad experiences. Uh, BUT it's interesting
up in Washington DC, they had a big anti
trafficking bust and they busted people who talked about
the sex workers, uh, that day, uh, that they
hired on this website and they got busted for
it for promoting prostitution. Well, if you look at
the website, if you look at the things they
said, most of them are very positive. These men
are hanging around saying very positive thing. I said,
well, I really like her. I hope she doesn't
move, you know? And, oh, wow, this one is
really nice and oh my God, you know, and
of course you have bad on you. You have
bad clients like I've said and, and sometimes there
are bad experiences. Yeah, that happens. But you know,
the atmosphere created by this website was a very
positive one about sex workers. My God. Do you,
do you
think
that of course, with your experience not only interviewing
some sex workers and also some clients and uh
dealing with or reading or learning about the, some
of the arguments put forth by prohibitionists, do you
get the sense that most of these ideas that
they have or develop about sex work itself, the
sex workers? And then also the clients stem mostly
from them having specific moral values that they are,
for example, more socially conservative. And so they associate
sex work with something that goes against, for example,
family values monogamy and stuff like that. I mean,
is, do you get that sense from what you
studied there or
not? My sense? Is that, let's just say morals,
the sense of morals that is so deeply intertwined
and everything that is said, uh except for the
most bare bones, empirical analysts that you really can't
parse out moral underpinnings. And what may be just
other philosophical underpinnings or abstract underpinnings, even though the
21st century is, is different than the 20th century
and certainly different than the 19th century. All of
us have been raised in a culture that, that
has something to say, something moral to say about
sex and something moral to say about women and
something moral to say about sex work. We've grown
up in that culture. We didn't just go to
school and learn it. It was inculcated in us
as Children. To me, it's obvious that that never
goes away when I listen to prohibitionists talk about
the maladies of sex work. It's just floating around
back there all the time. Uh And it's what,
you know, i it's what, what means I think
to a large extent, it is the reason why
people can get away with using the words like
exploitation and power differential without defining it without getting
careful of what they're saying. They can get away
with that because they're talking to people with this
moral substratum in the back of their minds. It's
sort of there, it's an audience that's waiting to
hear that and they can get away with it.
Uh uh WHICH is all the more reason why
we have to emphasize concrete things that sex workers
say and, and it just seems to me that
that's a more effective way to talk and this
conventional world that we live in rather than trying
to sort of out philosophize or out moralize the
moralists. It's, it's, uh, you end up going in
circles and people, people can have the moral beliefs
that they believe. My point is, well, listen to
what sex workers say and maybe you'll leave them
alone and you can just, you know, you can,
you can have the morals that you wanna have.
But before you start imposing them on sex workers,
listen to the concrete things that they have to
say.
So I have one final question. Then earlier, you
talked about decriminalization as a solution to sex trafficking,
for example. But another approach that some people left
to prostitution is the the end demand approach. So
could you tell us about that approach? And do
you think that it would solve any of the
issues identified by sex, negative people, sex, negative feminists
and so on? And that it wouldn't, it would
even be good for the sex workers themselves?
Well, we've got research on that. OK, by and
large. The answer is no, Sweden is the one
who started this, say, well, we'll outlaw buying sex
but we won't outlaw selling it. And oh, that
is sold uh as an abstract issue. The same
way anything else is solved is because it, it
hurts women. So let's punish the men. But then
you add on to that the assumption that women
themselves are sort of these Children, you infantilize Children
say, well, they really don't have anything to do
with it. This is all doing of men. So
we'll just outlaw men. The more, the more empirical
effort was to say, we will do the end
in demand in order to eradicate trafficking as a
way to as an empirical matter. You know, if
you outlaw buying sex, the market will dry up
for sex slaves, you want sex slaves. And the
statistical analysis is complex. But the results are pretty
much out now that in Sweden, there's no, there's
no evidence that that decreased traffic didn't happen. I
have not seen evidence from any other country that
later on took up that manner other Scandinavian countries.
France is a late entry. Israel is a late
entry. Both the Irelands did it. I have not
seen evidence in any of those locations that say
if you do inman trafficking decreases now. So that's
the, that's the empirical evidence for it. No, let's
just think about it. Just think about it lo
logically as it stands now. Trafficking is illegal even
in a jurisdiction that decriminalizes the whole thing, even
like New Zealand or New South Wales trafficking is
a crime. It's a serious crime. OK? So now
you have, now you have people who say well,
OK, if, if you have a jurisdiction, any jurisdiction
or let, let's say a, a jurisdiction where it's
decriminalized, but we need to add on to that
the criminalization of customers. So what is the customer
supposed to think? I mean, if the, the customer
is not most jurisdiction, most jurisdiction in the United
States. Mm Sex work is a misdemeanor and New
Zealand is not a crime at all and that
uh but sex work happens both in the United
States. New Zealand customers are not deterred by it
being a misdemeanor. The in demand suggests as far
as I can see that, that, that you keep
those same prohibition laws, but you only apply them
to the, to the buyer if you keep those
same prohibition laws in place, that means it's a
misdemeanor for the guy to buy sex. It is
a felony to engage in trafficking. If that felony,
the fact that you will go to prison if
that is not a deterrent, why do you believe
that it being a misdemeanor if you buy sex
from anyone is going to deter you? I and
I, I know I went on, I went round
and round about that a bit. Say I'm, I'm
a male and, and, and I'm thinking about, I'm,
I'm, I'm gonna buy a slave. I'm gonna engage
in sex trafficking. And then, and then I realized
if I get caught that is a felony, I
will go to prison. And then I think, well,
now if I if I do that, that will
also be a misdemeanor. So gee whiz I won't
do it. Does that make any sense? If the
fact that it is a felony does not deter
me? Why would a misdemeanor prostitution violation deter me?
But that is what the inman theory is. It
is, it is, it is make all prostitution illegal.
This, this, this misdemeanor but just for the buyer,
it doesn't make sense that that would deter criminals
for abducting and forcing people that's not a deterrent.
They, they hide from you and they're willing to
risk prison. And you know, e even if that
was a little too convoluted, the point is research
has been done. Uh It doesn't work, it has
some effects I think in Sweden for some time,
sex workers move from the street indoors. Maybe that
made people happy. Although now they may have moved
back out. Sex workers will tell you uh you
know what happens, what happens when you, when you
criminalize my clients, you know, you pretend to have
compassion for me. This is the root of it.
All. You wanna help me, you have compassion for
me. So you outlaw my clients. You know what
happens? What happens is my respectable law blinding clients
that I love. They don't come to see me
anymore. I'm left with the criminals, the people who
don't care about the law, the people who don't
care about respectability. It just makes my client base
worse that's one of the things that sex workers
actually say about it. But you know, it is.
Um IT'S a funny theory because in the end
it infantilize women. It doesn't recognize the fact that
sex work is something that women choose because it's
the best option. You're not helping her by putting
a cop at her door and saying we're not
going to let the clients in. And by the
way, we're doing this because we love you sex
worker, we have compassion for you. So we're not
gonna give you a better job. We're just going
to put a cop at your doorstep and not
let your clients come in. That makes no sense.
That makes no legal sense. That makes no moral
sense. Great.
So let's send on that note then and the
book is again sex workers and their clients in
their own words. Of course, I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview and
Doctor Mosley just before we go, are there any
places on the internet where people can find your
work? Or are there any online resources you would
like to point to?
Well, you, you can just put in the title
and you can find it. The publisher is Paul
Gray mcmillan and you can go into their website
and find when you find the book, uh you
can actually purchase individual chapters if you like. That's
something the publisher has done. Um And, but you
can just Yeah, it's easy enough to find you
just type in the title,
right? So, Doctor Mosley, thank you so much again
for coming on the show. It's been a very
informative and fascinating conversation.
Thank you. Thank you for the interview.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitting B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
Nai Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken
Herz J and Lain Jung Y and the K
Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David
Wilson Yasa, dear Roman Roach Diego and Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi,
Nale Me, Gary G Alman, Samos, Ari and Ye
Polton John Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lati Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams. Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist Lary
Dey Junior, Old Arrington Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris to
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan, Nicholas
Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perros,
Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jan Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Stuffin, Tom Veg and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.